.TH GFTODVI 1L  10/21/89
.SH NAME
gftodvi - make proofsheets from generic font files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gftodvi
[gf_file_name]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I GFtoDVI
converts a generic font file (output by METAFONT) to a
device independent (DVI) file that can be typeset using the same
software as for TeX output. The characters in the GF file will
appear one per page, with labels, titles, and annotations as
specified in Appendix H (Hardcopy Proofs) of
.I The
.IR METAFONTbook .
.PP
.I GFtoDVI
uses four other fonts, in addition to the main gf file
input. A `gray' font isused to typeset the
pixels that actually make up the character. (We wouldn't
want all the pixels to be simply black, since then labels,
key points, and other information would be lost.) A `title' font
is used for the information at the top of the page. A `label' font
is used for the labels on key points of the figure. A `slant'
font is used to typeset diagonal lines, which would
otherwise have to be simulated using horizontal and vertical rules.
The default gray, title, and label fonts are respectively `gray',
`cmr8', and `cmtt10'; there is no default slant font.
.PP
The filename on the command line must be complete. (The program prompts
you for it if you don't give it.) Because
the resolution is part of the extension, it would not make
sense to add on a default extension as is done with TeX or
DVI-reading software. The output file name defaults to the same
root as the gf file, with the `dvi' extension added. For
example, the input file
.I io.2602gf
would become
.IR io.dvi .
.PP
The TEXFONTS environment variable is used to find tfm
files that the program needs. If TEXFONTS is not defined, the directory
/home/fonts is assumed.
.PP
To change the default fonts, you can give `special' commands in your
GF file, or you can change the fonts online. An online dialog ensues if you
type `/' after the gf_file_name. For example,
.br
.ti +2
gftodvi io.300gf/
.br
.ti +2
Special font substitution: grayfont black
.br
.ti +2
OK; any more? grayfontarea /home/art/don/
.br
.ti +2
OK; any more? slantfont slantimagen6
.br
.ti +2
OK; any more? <RET>
.br
will use /home/art/don/black as the `gray' font and /home/fonts/slantimagen6
as the slant font (it's a font for lines with slant 1/6 at imagen resolution).
.SH "FILES"
/home/fonts/{gray.tfm,...}   The default fonts
.PP
/home/tex/{dist,local}/lib/{gray.mf,...}    The METAFONT sources
.SH "SEE ALSO"
tex(1), mf(1)
.br
Donald Knuth,
.I The METAFONTbook
.br
Donald Knuth et al.,
.I METAFONTware
.SH "AUTHORS"
Donald Knuth wrote the program. The program was published as
part of the
.I METAFONTware
technical report (Stanford CS1255), available from TUG (the TeX Users Group).
Paul Richards ported it to Unix.
