.TH MFT 1L 10/21/89
.SH NAME
mft \- translate METAFONT code to TeX code
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mft
mffile[.mf] [-cs] [changefile[.ch]] [stylefile[.mft]]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I mft
program is used to create a TeX file for viewing a METAFONT program.
It takes appropriate care of typographic details like page
layout and the use of indentation, italics, boldface, etc., as illustrated
in the book
.I Computer Modern Typefaces.
Special conventions in METAFONT comments allow you to control things that
would not otherwise come out right; section 1 of the MFT documentation
in the
.I METAFONTware
report explains these rules.

The command line has one required file name and two optional file names.
The required
one is a METAFONT source file; there is also an optional change file
(which works just as the change files to \.{TANGLE} and \.{WEAVE})
and an optional style file (while is prepended to everything).

A file name
that doesn't contain a dot is always given an extension, either .mf (METAFONT)
or .ch (change) or .mft (style). If no style file is specified, the style
plain.mft is automatically used. The METAFONT and change file names are
either absolute paths or relative to the current directory; the style file
is either an absolute path or relative to the MFINPUTS environment variable.
.PP
The output TeX file name is formed by using .tex in place of
the extension of the METAFONT file name.
.SH FILES

/home/tex/dist/lib/mftmac.tex   TeX macros used by mft output.
.br
/home/tex/dist/lib/plain.mft    Default style file.
.br
/home/tex/dist/lib/cmbase.mft   Style file for Computer Modern.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
D. E. Knuth et al.,
.I METAFONTware
.PP
mf(1), weave(1)
.SH "AUTHORS"
MFT was written by Donald E. Knuth, and he ported to Unix with the help of
Pierre MacKay and the Unix port of WEAVE by Howard Trickey and Pavel Curtis.
The program is published in the
.I METAFONTware
report (Stanford CS1225), available from TUG (the TeX Users Group).
