.TH TEX 1L  10/19/89
.SH NAME
tex, initex, virtex  \- text formatting and typesetting
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tex
[ first line ]
.PP
.B initex
[ first line ]
.PP
.B virtex
[ first line ]
.ie t .ds TX \fRT\v'+0.3m'E\v'-0.3m'X\fP \" for troff
.el .ds TX TeX \" for nroff
.\" to use, type \*(TX

.SH DESCRIPTION
\*(TX
formats the interspersed text and commands contained in the named
files
and outputs a typesetter independent file (called
.I DVI
which is short for
.IR D e V ice
.IR I ndependent ).
\*(TX
capabilities and language are described in
.I The \*(TXbook
by Donald E. Knuth, published by Addison-Wesley.
.PP
Any arguments given on the command line to the
\*(TX
programs are passed to them as the first input line.
(But it is easier to type them as the first input line, since you don't have
to quote any of the symbols.)
As described in 
.I The \*(TXbook,
that first line should begin with a file name
or a \\controlsequence.
The normal usage is to say
.RB `` tex
.IR paper ''
to start processing 
.I paper.tex.
The name ``paper'' will be the ``jobname'', and is used in forming
output file names.
If \*(TX doesn't get a file name in the first line, the jobname is ``texput''.
The default `.tex' extension can be overridden by specifying an extension
explicitly.
.PP
If there is no paper.tex in the current directory, \*(TX will look
look through a search path of directories to try to find it.
The standard library on the default search path
has the basic format package, plain.tex, described
in the \*(TXbook, as well as several others.
Note that it is hardly ever necessary to \\input plain, since the 
.I tex
program has preloaded it.
This means that all of the control sequences discussed in the \*(TXbook
are known to \*(TX.
.PP
The output DVI file is written on 
.I name.dvi
where
.I name
is the jobname.
A log of error messages goes into
.I name.log.
.PP
.PP
Several environment variables can be used to set up directory
paths to search when \*(TX opens a file for input.
For example, the
.I csh
command
.br
.in +2
setenv TEXINPUTS .:/usr/me/mylib:/usr/local/lib/tex/inputs
.in -2
or the
.I sh
command sequence
.br
.in +4
TEXINPUTS=.:/usr/me/mylib:/usr/local/lib/tex/inputs
.br
export TEXINPUTS
.in -4
.br
would cause all invocations of \*(TX and its derivatives to look for
\\input files first in the current directory, then in a hypothetical
user's ``mylib'', and finally in the system library.
Normally, the user will place the command sequence which sets up the
TEXINPUTS environment variable in the
.I .cshrc
or
.I .profile
file.
The Environment section below lists the relevant environment variables,
and their defaults.
.PP
The
.I e
response to \*(TX's error prompt causes the
.I emacs
editor to start up at the current line of the current file.
There is an environment variable, TEXEDIT, that can be used to change the
editor used.  It should contain a string with "%s" indicating where the
filename goes and "%d" indicating where the decimal linenumber (if any) goes.
For example, a TEXEDIT string for
.I vi
can be set by:
.br
.ti +2
setenv TEXEDIT "/usr/bin/vi +%d %s"
.br
.PP
.PP
A convenient file in the library is null.tex, containing nothing.
When \*(TX can't find a file it thinks you want to input, it keeps
asking you for another file name;  responding `null' gets you out
of the loop if you don't want to input anything.
.PP
Two other \*(TX programs,
.I initex
and
.IR virtex ,
can be used to create fast-loading customized versions of \*(TX.
The
.I initex
program is used to create a
.I format (.fmt)
file that permits fast loading of fonts and macro packages.
After processing the fonts and definitions desired, a \\dump command
will create the format file.
The format file is used by
.I virtex.
It needs to be given a format file name as the first thing it reads.
A format file name is preceded by an &, which needs to be escaped with \\
if given on the command line.
So, for instance, one could create a file myfmt.fmt using initex,
and then set up a cshell alias with
.br
.ti +2
alias mytex "virtex \\&myfmt"
.br
to allow the use of ``mytex paper''. A slightly better way, which also works,
is to rename myfmt.fmt as mytex.fmt and then make a symbolic link between
/usr/local/bin/mytex and /usr/local/bin/virtex; virtex looks first to
see if there is a format whose name matches arg0.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The defaults for all environments are set at the
time of compilation, by reference to a file called /home/tex/localtexpaths.h.  
.PP
.IP TEXINPUTS
Search path for \\input and \\openin files.  It should be colon-separated,
and start with ``.''.  The entire path must be no longer than 700
characters long.
Default: .:..:/home/tex/local/lib:/home/tex/dist/lib
.IP TEXFONTS
Search path for font metric files.  The entire path must be no longer than 100
characters long.  The default doesn't include the current area (".") to
avoid confusing the programs that convert the output for printing on the
various output devices (most of which don't know about the path stuff yet).
Default: /home/fonts
.IP TEXFORMATS
Search path for format files.  Default: .:/home/tex/local/tex
.IP TEXPOOL
Search path for INITEX internal strings.  Default: .:/home/tex/local/tex
.IP TEXEDIT
Command template for switching to editor.  
Default: "emacs +%d %s"

.SH FILES

.TP 1.5i
/home/tex/{dist,local}/lib
\*(TX's library areas
.TP
/home/tex/local/tex/tex.pool
Encoded text of \*(TX's messages
.TP
/home/fonts/*.tfm
Width information used by \*(TX (\*(TX Font Metric files)
.TP
/home/fonts/*{gf,pk}
Bit maps for low resolution devices.
.TP
/home/tex/local/tex/*.fmt
\*(TX .fmt files
.TP
/home/tex/dist/lib/plain.tex
The ``default'' macro package
.br
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Donald E. Knuth,
.I The \*(TXbook
.br
Leslie Lamport,
.I The LaTeX  Document Preparation System
.br
Michael Spivak,
.I The Joy of \*(TX
.br
.I TUGBOAT
(the publication of the \*(TX Users Group)
.SH "TRIVIA"
\*(TX, pronounced properly, rhymes with ``blecchhh.''  Note that the proper
spelling in typewriter-like output is ``TeX'' and not ``TEX'' or ``tex.''
.SH "BUGS"
Maybe there should be character other than & to specify format files,
since if you forget the \\ on the command line, it doesn't do what you want!
Also, there is no way to read a \*(TX input file with no filename extension.
.SH "AUTHORS"
\*(TX was designed by Donald E. Knuth, 
who implemented it using his WEB system for Pascal programs.
It was ported to Unix at Stanford by Howard Trickey, and
at Cornell by Pavel Curtis.
This version is a combination of their efforts.
